Document Store Derivations and Deriving Paths (#12290)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/source/store/drv.md

Other system (like Git or IPFS) also store and transfer immutable data, but they don't concern themselves with *how* that data was created.

This is where Nix distinguishes itself.
*Derivations* represent individual build steps, and *deriving paths* are needed to to the *outputs* of those build steps.
The two concepts need to be introduced together because, as described below, each depends on the other.

## Derivation {#derivation}

A derivation is a specification for running an executable on precisely defined input files to repeatably produce output files at uniquely determined file system paths.

What is natural Unix analog for a build step *in action*?
Answer: a process that will eventually exit, leaving behind some output date.
What is the natural way to *plan* such a step?
An `execve` system call.

A derivation consists of:

 - A (base) name

 - A set of [*inputs*][inputs], a set of [deriving paths][deriving path]

 - A map of [*outputs*][outputs], from names to other data

 - Everything needed for an `execve` system call:

   - The ["builder"][builder], a path to an executable

   - A list of [arguments][args]

   - A map of [environment variables][env].

>  - A two-component ["system" type][system] (e.g. `x86_64-linux`) where the executable is to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - A ["system" type][system] (e.g. `x86_64-linux`) where the executable is to run.
```

[builder]: #builder
[args]: #args
[env]: #env
[system]: #system

### Parts of a derivation

#### Inputs {#inputs}

The inputs are a set of [deriving paths][deriving path], refering to all store objects needed in order to perform this build step.

The information needed for the `execve` system call will presumably include many [store paths][store path]:

 - The path to the executable is almost surely starts with a store path
 - The arguments and environment variables likely contain many other store paths.

But just as we stored the references contained in the file data separately for store objects, so we store the set of inputs separately from the builder, arguments, and environment variables.

#### Outputs {#outputs}

The outputs are the derivations are the [store objects][store object] it is obligated to produce.

Outputs are assigned names, and also consistent of other information based on the type of derivation.

Output names can be any string which is also a valid [store path] name.
The store path of the output store object (also called an [output path] for short), has a name based on the derivation name and the output name.
Most outputs are named `drvMame + '-' + outputName`.

> However, an output named "out" is just has name `drvName`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, an output named "out" is not appended to `drvName`.
```

#### System {#system}

The system type on which the [`builder`](#attr-builder) executable is meant to be run.

A necessary condition for Nix to schedule a given derivation on given Nix instance is for the "system" of that derivation to match that instance's [`system` configuration option].

By putting the `system` in each derivation, Nix allows *heterogenous* build plans, where not all steps can be run on the same machine or same sort of machine.
A Nix isntance scheduling builds can automatically [build on other platforms](@docroot@/language/derivations.md#attr-builder) by forwarding build requests to other Nix instances.

[`system` configuration option]: @docroot@/command-ref/conf-file.md#conf-system

### Referencing derivations

Derivations are always referred to by the [store path] of the store object they are encoded to.
See the [encoding section](#derivation-encoding) for more details on how this encoding works, and thus what exactly what store path we would end up with for a given derivations.

The store path of the store object which encodes a derivation is often called a "derivation path" for brevity.

### Placeholder

> TODO

Reviewer: TODO

Two types:

- Reference to own outputs

- output derived paths (see below), corresponding to store paths we haven't yet realized.

> N.B. Current method of creating hashes which we substitute for string fields should be seen as an artifact of the current "ATerm" serialization format.
> In order to be more explicit, and avoid gotchas analogous to [SQL injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL_injection),

> > we ought to consider switching two a different format where we explicitly use a syntax for a oncatentation of plain strings and placeholders written more explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> we ought to consider switching two a different format where we explicitly use a syntax for a concatentation of plain strings and placeholders written more explicitly.
```

> > N.B. Current method of creating hashes which we substitute for string fields should be seen as an artifact of the current "ATerm" serialization format.
> > In order to be more explicit, and avoid gotchas analogous to [SQL injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL_injection),
> > we ought to consider switching two a different format where we explicitly use a syntax for a oncatentation of plain strings and placeholders written more explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I'm not so sure, but you could open an issue

## Deriving path {#deriving-path}

Deriving paths are a way to refer to [store objects][store object] that might not yet be [realised][realise].
This is necessary because, in general and particularly for [content-addressed derivations][content-addressed derivation], the [store path] of an [output] is not known in advance.
There are two forms:

- *constant*: just a [store path]
  It can be made [valid][validity] by copying it into the store: from the evaluator, command line interface or another st    ore.

- *output*: a pair of a [store path] to a [derivation] and an [output] name.

In pseudo code:

```idris
type OutputName = String

data DerivingPath
  = ConstantPath { path : StorePath }
  | Output {

>       drvPath : StorePath,

Reviewer: This will need an update for RFC 92, I guess when it's stable?

      output  : OutputName,
    }
```

[deriving path]: #deriving-path

[content-addressed derivation]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-content-addressed-derivation
[realise]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-realise
[store object]: @docroot@/store/store-object.md
[store path]: @docroot@/store/store-path.md

## Encoding

### Derivation {#derivation-encoding}

There are two formats, documented separately:

- The legacy ["ATerm" format](@docroot@/protocols/derivation-aterm.md)

> - The modern [JSON format](@docroot@/protocols/json/derivation.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The experimental [JSON format](@docroot@/protocols/json/derivation.md)
```

Reviewer: Something for tracking stabilization todos might be helpful.

> Currently derivations are always serialized to store objects using the "ATerm" format, but this is subject to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently derivations are always serialized to store objects using the "ATerm" format.
```

implied

Regardless of the format used, when serializing to store object, content-addressing is always used.
In the common case the inputs to store objects are either:

>  - constant deriving paths for content-addressed source objects, which are "initial inputs" rather than the outputs of some other derivation (except in the case of bootstrap binaries).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - constant deriving paths for content-addressed source objects, which are "initial inputs" rather than the outputs of some other derivation
```

I think that happens outside the Nix world, so that's just confusing

 - the outputs of other derivations abiding by this same invariant.

This common case makes for the following useful property:
when we serialize such a derivation graph to store objects, the resulting closures are *entirely* content-addressed.

Here is a sketch at the proof of this:

 - The inputs which are constant deriving paths become references of the serialized derivations, but they are content-addressed per the above.

 - For inputs which are output deriving paths, we cannot directly reference the input because in general it is not built yet.

>    We instead "peal back" the output deriving path to take its underlying serialized derivation (the `drvPath` field), and reference that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   We instead "peel back" the output deriving path to take its underlying serialized derivation (the `drvPath` field), and reference that.
```

   Since it is a derivation, it must be content-addressed

 - There are no other ways a store object would end up in an input closure.

>    The references of a derivation in store object form always come from solely from the inputs of the derivation.

Reviewer: Except for `builtins.storePath`, `builtins.appendContext`, as well as `builtins.fetchClosure` with certain parameters.

Author: Hmm? Those will all create `inputSrcs`.

It is true that those can be used to create non-content-addressed `inputSrcs`, but that falls outside of the common case mentioned above.

### Deriving Path {#deriving-path-encoding}

- *constant*

  Constant deriving paths are encoded simply as the underlying store path is.
  Thus, we see that every encoded store path is also a valid encoded (constant) deriving path.

- *output*

  Output deriving paths are encoded by

  - encoding of a store path referring to a derivation

>   - a separator (`^` or `!` depending on context)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - a `^` separator (or `!` in some legacy contexts)
```

>   - the name of an output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - the name of an output of the previously referred derivation
```

A link would be helpful, but I don't think it has an anchor yet.

  > **Example**
  >
  > ```
  > /nix/store/lxrn8v5aamkikg6agxwdqd1jz7746wz4-firefox-98.0.2.drv^out
  > ```
  >
  > This parses like so:
  >
  > ```
  > /nix/store/lxrn8v5aamkikg6agxwdqd1jz7746wz4-firefox-98.0.2.drv^out
  > |------------------------------------------------------------| |-|
  > store path (usual encoding)                                    output name
  >                                                           |--|
  >                                                           note the ".drv"
  > ```

## Extending the model to be higher-order

**Experimental feature**: [`dynamic-derivations`](@docroot@/development/experimental-features.md#xp-feature-dynamic-derivations)

We can apply the same extension discussed for the abstract model to the concrete model.
Again, only the data type for Deriving Paths needs to be modified.
Derivations are the same except for using the new extended deriving path data type.

```idris
type OutputName = String

data DerivingPath
  = ConstantPath { storeObj : StorePath }
  | Output {
      drv    : DerivingPath, -- Note: changed
      output : OutputName,
    }
```

> Now, the `drv` field of `Output` is itself a `DerivingPath` instead of an `StorePath`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, the `drv` field of `Output` is itself a `DerivingPath` instead of a `StorePath`.
```

Under this extended model, `DerivingPath`s are thus inductively built up from an `ConstantPath`, contains in 0 or more outer `Output`s.

### Encoding {#deriving-path-encoding}

> The encoding is adjusted in a very simplest way, merely displaying the same

Reviewer: TODO

> **Example**
>
> ```
> /nix/store/lxrn8v5aamkikg6agxwdqd1jz7746wz4-firefox-98.0.2.drv^foo.drv^bar.drv^out
> |----------------------------------------------------------------------------| |-|
> inner deriving path (usual encoding)                                           output name
> |--------------------------------------------------------------------| |-----|
> even more inner deriving path (usual encoding)                         output name
> |------------------------------------------------------------| |-----|
> innermost constant store path (usual encoding)                 output name
> ```

## Extra extensions

### `__structuredAttrs`

> Historically speaking, most users of Nix made GNU Bash with a script the command run, regardless of what they were doing.

Reviewer: Here the text some work needs

Author: I am just going to delete this, because it is too explanation-y, and there are langauge docs we can move to store docs for this (in a subsequent PR!).

Bash variable are automatically created from env vars, but bash also supports array and string-keyed map variables in addition to string variables.
People also usually create derivations using language which also support these richer data types.
It was thus desired a way to get this data from the language "planning" the derivation to language to bash, the language evaluated at "run time".

`__structuredAttrs` does this by smuggling inside the core derivation format a map of named richer data.
At run time, this becomes two things:

1. A JSON file containing that map.
2. A bash script setting those variables.

The bash command can be passed a script which will "source" that Nix-created bash script, setting those variables with the richer data.
The outer script can then do whatever it likes with those richer variables as input.

> However, since derivations can already contain arbitary input sources, the vast majority of `__structuredAttrs` can be handled by upper layers.
> We might consider implementing `__structuredAttrs` in higher layers in the future, and simplifying the store layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This should be an issue, and not docs.

[store derivation]: #store-derivation
[inputs]: #inputs
[input]: #inputs
[outputs]: #outputs
[output]: #outputs
[process creation fields]: #process-creation-fields
[builder]: #builder
[args]: #args
[env]: #env
[system]: #system

### Referencing derivations {#derivation-path}

Derivations are always referred to by the [store path] of the store object they are encoded to.
See the [encoding section](#derivation-encoding) for more details on how this encoding works, and thus what exactly what store path we would end up with for a given derivation.

The store path of the store object which encodes a derivation is often called a *derivation path* for brevity.

## Deriving path {#deriving-path}

Deriving paths are a way to refer to [store objects][store object] that may or may not yet be [realised][realise].
There are two forms:

- [*constant*]{#deriving-path-constant}: just a [store path].
  It can be made [valid][validity] by copying it into the store: from the evaluator, command line interface or another store.

- [*output*]{#deriving-path-output}: a pair of a [store path] to a [store derivation] and an [output] name.

In pseudo code:

```typescript
type OutputName = String;

> type ConstantPath = { path: StorePath; }
> type OutputPath = { drvPath: StorePath; output: OutputName; }

Author: ```suggestion
type ConstantPath = { 
  path: StorePath;
};

type OutputPath = {
  drvPath: StorePath;
  output: OutputName;
};
```

> type DerivingPath = ConstantPath | OutputPath

Author: ```suggestion
type DerivingPath = ConstantPath | OutputPath;
```

# Store Derivation and Deriving Path

So far, we have covered "inert" [store objects][store object].
But the point of the Nix store layer is to be a build system.
Other system (like Git or IPFS) also store and transfer immutable data, but they don't concern themselves with *how* that data was created.

This is where Nix distinguishes itself.
*Derivations* represent individual build steps, and *deriving paths* are needed to refer to the *outputs* of those build steps before they are built.
<!-- The two concepts need to be introduced together because, as described below, each depends on the other. -->

## Store Derivation {#store-derivation}

A derivation is a specification for running an executable on precisely defined input files to repeatably produce output files at uniquely determined file system paths.

> What is the natural Unix analog for a build step *in action*?
> Answer: a process that will eventually exit, leaving behind some output files.
> What is the natural way to *plan* such a step?
> An `execve` system call.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

See the [encoding section](#derivation-encoding) for more details on how this encoding works, and thus what exactly what store path we would end up with for a given derivation.

The store path of the store object which encodes a derivation is often called a *derivation path* for brevity.

## Deriving path {#deriving-path}

Deriving paths are a way to refer to [store objects][store object] that might not yet be [realised][realise].
This is necessary because, in general and particularly for [content-addressed derivations][content-addressed derivation], the [store path] of an [output] is not known in advance.
There are two forms:

- [*constant*]{#deriving-path-constant}: just a [store path].
  It can be made [valid][validity] by copying it into the store: from the evaluator, command line interface or another st    ore.

- [*output*]{#deriving-path-output}: a pair of a [store path] to a [store derivation] and an [output] name.

In pseudo code:

```idris
type OutputName = String

data DerivingPath
  = Constant { path : StorePath }
  | Output {
      drvPath : StorePath,
      output  : OutputName,
    }
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Deriving paths are necessary because, in general and particularly for [content-addressed derivations][content-addressed derivation], the [store path] of an [output] is not known in advance.
We can use an output deriving path to refer to such an out, instead of the store path which we do not yet know.

```

[deriving path]: #deriving-path
[validity]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-validity

## Parts of a derivation

With both [store derivations][store derivation] introduced and [deriving paths][deriving path] defined,
it is now possible to define the parts of a derivation.

### Inputs {#inputs}

The inputs are a set of [deriving paths][deriving path], refering to all store objects needed in order to perform this build step.

> The information needed for the `execve` system call will presumably include many [store paths][store path]:

Author: ```suggestion
The [process creation fields] will presumably include many [store paths][store path]:
```

 - The path to the executable is almost surely starts with a store path
 - The arguments and environment variables likely contain many other store paths.

> But just as we stored the references contained in the file data separately for store objects, so we store the set of inputs separately from the builder, arguments, and environment variables.

Author: ```suggestion
But rather than somehow scanning all the other fields for inputs, Nix requires that all inputs be explicitly collected in the inputs field. It is instead the responsibility of the creator of a derivation to  ensure that every store object referenced in another field (e.g. referenced by store path) is included in this inputs field.
```

> But just as we stored the references contained in the file data separately for store objects, so we store the set of inputs separately from the builder, arguments, and environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But rather than somehow scanning all the other fields for inputs, Nix requires that all inputs be explicitly collected in the inputs field. It is instead the responsibility of the creator of a derivation (e.g. the evaluator) to  ensure that every store object referenced in another field (e.g. referenced by store path) is included in this inputs field.
```

  This is a placeholder for a derivation's own output.

- [Input placeholder]{#input-placeholder}:

  This is a placeholder to a derivation's non-constant [input],
  i.e. an input that is an [output derived path].

> **Explanation**
>
> In general, we need to realise [realise] a [store object] in order to be sure to have a store object for it.
> But for these two cases this is either impossible or impractical:
>
> - In the output case this is impossible:
>
>   We cannot built the output until we have a correct derivation, and we cannot have a correct derivation (without using placeholders) until we have the output path.
>
> - In the input case this is impractical:
>
>   We an always built a dependency, and then refer to its output by store path, but by doing so we loose the ability for a derivation graph to describe an entire build plan consisting of multiple build steps.

> **Note**
>
> The current method of creating hashes which we substitute for string fields should be seen as an artifact of the current "ATerm" serialization format.
> In order to be more explicit, and avoid gotchas analogous to [SQL injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL_injection),

> > we ought to consider switching two a different format where we explicitly use a syntax for the concatenation of plain strings and [deriving paths] written more explicitly.

Author: https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/11954 this related FYI

### System {#system}

The system type on which the [`builder`](#attr-builder) executable is meant to be run.

> A necessary condition for Nix to schedule a given derivation on given Nix instance is for the "system" of that derivation to match that instance's [`system` configuration option].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A necessary condition for Nix to schedule a given derivation on some Nix instance is for the "system" of that derivation to match that instance's [`system` configuration option].
```

This kinda ignores remote builders, but that's probably ok.

By putting the `system` in each derivation, Nix allows *heterogenous* build plans, where not all steps can be run on the same machine or same sort of machine.

> A Nix isntance scheduling builds can automatically [build on other platforms](@docroot@/language/derivations.md#attr-builder) by forwarding build requests to other Nix instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nix can schedule builds such that it automatically builds on other platforms by [forwarding build requests](@docroot@/advanced-topics/distributed-builds.md) to other Nix instances.
```

[`system` configuration option]: @docroot@/command-ref/conf-file.md#conf-system

[content-addressed derivation]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-content-addressed-derivation
[realise]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-realise
[store object]: @docroot@/store/store-object.md
[store path]: @docroot@/store/store-path.md

## Encoding

### Derivation {#derivation-encoding}

There are two formats, documented separately:

- The legacy ["ATerm" format](@docroot@/protocols/derivation-aterm.md)

> - The experimental [JSON format](@docroot@/protocols/json/derivation.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The experimental, currently under development and changing [JSON format](@docroot@/protocols/json/derivation.md)
```

Every derivation has a canonical choice of encoding used to serialize it to a store object.
This ensures that there is a canonical [store path] used to refer to the derivation, as described in [Referencing derivations](#derivation-path).

> **Note**
>
> Currently, the canonical encoding for every derivation is the "ATerm" format,
> but this is subject to change for types derivations which are not yet stable.

> Regardless of the format used, when serializing to store objects, content-addressing is always used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of the format used, when serializing a derivation to a store object, that store object will be content-addressed.
```

> In the common case the inputs to store objects are either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the common case, the inputs to store objects are either:
```

>  - constant deriving paths for content-addressed source objects, which are "initial inputs" rather than the outputs of some other derivation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - [constant deriving paths](#deriving-path-constant) for content-addressed source objects, which are "initial inputs" rather than the outputs of some other derivation
```

>  - the outputs of other derivations abiding by this same invariant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - the outputs of other derivations
```

It wasn't clear to me what the invariant was (things being CA), but also that doesn't quite hold true, because not all opaque paths are actually CA - for instance `builtins.storePath` of an input addressed output store path string.

> 
> This common case makes for the following useful property:
> when we serialize such a derivation graph to store objects, the resulting closures are *entirely* content-addressed.
> 
> Here is a sketch at the proof of this:
> 
>  - The inputs which are constant deriving paths become references of the serialized derivations, but they are content-addressed per the above.
> 
>  - For inputs which are output deriving paths, we cannot directly reference the input because in general it is not built yet.
>    We instead "peel back" the output deriving path to take its underlying serialized derivation (the `drvPath` field), and reference that.
>    Since it is a derivation, it must be content-addressed
> 
>  - There are no other ways a store object would end up in an input closure.
>    The references of a derivation in store object form always come from solely from the inputs of the derivation.

Author: ```suggestion

If those other derivations *also* abide by this common case (and likewise for transitive inputs), then the entire closure of the serialized derivation will be content-addressed.
```

  Thus, we see that every encoded store path is also a valid encoded (constant) deriving path.

- *output*

  Output deriving paths are encoded by

  - encoding of a store path referring to a derivation

  - a `^` separator (or `!` in some legacy contexts)

  - the name of an output of the previously referred derivation

  > **Example**
  >
  > ```
  > /nix/store/lxrn8v5aamkikg6agxwdqd1jz7746wz4-firefox-98.0.2.drv^out
  > ```
  >
  > This parses like so:
  >
  > ```
  > /nix/store/lxrn8v5aamkikg6agxwdqd1jz7746wz4-firefox-98.0.2.drv^out
  > |------------------------------------------------------------| |-|
  > store path (usual encoding)                                    output name
  >                                                           |--|
  >                                                           note the ".drv"
  > ```

## Extending the model to be higher-order

**Experimental feature**: [`dynamic-derivations`](@docroot@/development/experimental-features.md#xp-feature-dynamic-derivations)

We can apply the same extension discussed for the abstract model to the concrete model.
Again, only the data type for Deriving Paths needs to be modified.

> Derivations are the same except for using the new extended deriving path data type.

Author: Found the text that this was referring to, reworking it.

Author: ```suggestion
So far, we have used store paths to refer to derivations.
That works because we've implicitly assumed that all derivations are created *statically* --- created by some mechanism out of band, and then manually inserted into the store.
But what if derivations could also be created dynamically within Nix?
In other words, what if derivations could be the outputs of other derivations?

:::{.note}
In the parlance of "Build Systems à la carte", we would are generalizing Nix to be an "Monadic" instead of "Applicative" build system.
:::

Nothing stops this actually.
Simply by removing some artificial restrictions, we can allow derivation outputs to use text hashing, have a name that `.drv`, and then require such things to be valid ATerm-serialized derivations.

How should we refer to such derivations?
A Deriving path works, the same as how we refer to other derivation outputs.
But what about a dynamic derivations output?
(i.e. how do we refer to the output of an output of a derivation?)
For that we need to generalize the definition of deriving path, replacing the store path used to refer to the derivation with a nested deriving path:
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, we have used store paths to refer to derivations.
That works because we've implicitly assumed that all derivations are created *statically* --- created by some mechanism out of band, and then manually inserted into the store.
But what if derivations could also be created dynamically within Nix?
In other words, what if derivations could be the outputs of other derivations?

:::{.note}
In the parlance of "Build Systems à la carte", we are generalizing the Nix store layer to be a "Monadic" instead of "Applicative" build system.
:::

How should we refer to such derivations?
A deriving path works, the same as how we refer to other derivation outputs.
But what about a dynamic derivations output?
(i.e. how do we refer to the output of an output of a derivation?)
For that we need to generalize the definition of deriving path, replacing the store path used to refer to the derivation with a nested deriving path:
```

> 

Author: ```diff
-      drv    : StorePath,
+      drv    : DerivingPath,
```
add this below?

> ```idris
> type OutputName = String
> 
> data DerivingPath
>   = Constant { storeObj : StorePath }
>   | Output {
>       drv    : DerivingPath, -- Note: changed
>       output : OutputName,
>     }
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```diff
 type OutputName = String
 
 data DerivingPath
   = Constant { storeObj : StorePath }
   | Output {
-      drv    : StorePath,
+      drv    : DerivingPath,
       output : OutputName,
     }
```
```
